What’s the next challenge we’ll discuss?
It’s a disagreement between elders.
If you’re an elder,
have you experienced that?
Were voices raised?
Did tempers flare?
Has a friendship
with a fellow elder cooled off?
Though we rightly expect
appointed brothers to be exemplary,
the fact is that all of us, including elders,
are still imperfect.
Differences in backgrounds,
personalities, experiences, and opinions
can lead to disagreements.
And a disagreement, if not resolved,
can disrupt our peace and that of others.
In this talk, we’ll consider
how two elders in the first century,
Paul and Barnabas, sowed and reaped peace.
Let’s see how their example
can help appointed men today,
including all of you dear elders,
to resolve a disagreement.
Please open your Bible with me
to Acts chapter 15
and read together verses 36 to 39.
In the reading, please note the problem
that arose between Paul and Barnabas.
That’s Acts chapter 15,
beginning in verse 36:
“After some days, Paul said to Barnabas:
“‘Let us now return and visit the brothers
in every one of the cities
“where we proclaimed the word of Jehovah,
to see how they are.’
“Barnabas was determined
to take along John, who was called Mark.
“Paul, however, was not in favor
of taking him along with them,
“seeing that he had departed
from them in Pamphylia
“and had not gone with them to the work.
“At this there was a sharp burst of anger,
“so that they separated from each other;
and Barnabas took Mark along
and sailed away to Cyprus.”
What was the problem?
These two elders strongly disagreed
about whether to take Mark with them
on their next missionary tour.
Of course, expressing
a difference of opinion is not always wrong.
Verse 7 of this same chapter
reports that the apostles
and older men in Jerusalem
had an “intense discussion”
that led to a good outcome.
But in this case, what resulted?
Please look again at verse 39.
It would be nice to read,
“At this Paul and Barnabas prayed to Jehovah
and came to an agreement.”
Sadly, though,
their discussion on this occasion
led to a “sharp burst of anger,
so that they separated.”
As a result, their friendship
was affected by a temporary strain.
Why do we say “temporary”?
Because in time,
it appears that Paul and Barnabas
put this matter behind them.
A short time later
in Paul’s letter to the Galatians,
he wrote about Barnabas
and the activity they had enjoyed together.
And Paul did not bring up their dispute.
Also, when Paul later wrote
to the Colossians and then to Timothy,
Paul spoke well of Mark.
In fact, in Paul’s last inspired letter,
the second to Timothy, he wrote this:
“Bring Mark along with you,
for he is helpful to me in the ministry.”
Yes, it seems that Paul and Barnabas
resolved their disagreement.
Now, let’s think about that, brothers.
What made that possible?
It’s this: Long before their disagreement,
they had shared together
in an exciting ministry.
For years, they were united
in what the Bible calls a “bond of peace.”
So even though their friendship
experienced strain,
the bond between them was strong
—strong enough to withstand the stress.
Well, let’s bring this to our day.
In the following dramatization,
please notice how an elder sows peace.
But you know, there is more to the story.
Phil didn’t know just
how tense things were between Tim and I.
No idea.
We never talked,
I mean really talked, about it
until it was too late.
Look!
We need to talk.
I think we need to seriously reconsider
Phil’s qualifications.
You know he’s not
the type of brother that . . .
Enough. Enough!
Enough about Phil.
I know he’s your friend, . . .
Friend?
. . . but the body agreed that he
no longer qualified to serve as an elder.
Friend?
He’s worked with us for years!
The body decided, unanimously,
that he should no longer serve.
Because you pushed them!
Excuse me?
It’s enough that we have
those outside the congregation
putting pressure on us;
we do not need more in here!
Do you seriously think . . .
The conversation
—the argument—
it was terrible.
We both said things we didn’t mean.
And after that,
we both handled the situation poorly.
We needed to make things right.
It wasn’t easy,
but we talked it out.
And we made peace with Jehovah’s help.
Can you imagine what it would have been like
in that cellblock if we hadn’t?
We finally told Phil the whole story
once we were all roommates.
Wow!
We’re ready!
Let’s go sing.
Like an island of calm
In dark stormy seas,
God’s people are living in peace.
With our eyes of faith,
We see beyond the clouds
And know that the storm soon will cease.
To the ends of the earth,
There’ll be peace at last
For all eternity.
From the valleys below . . .
Elders, here’s the question
before all of us now:
How can we imitate Paul and Barnabas?
First, as elders,
we must apply Scriptural counsel
in our dealings with one another.
In the video, we just saw how imperfection
got the better of Tim and Carl
—their body language,
choice of words, tone of voice.
As Tim put it,
‘The argument was terrible.’
But after the dispute,
what did those two elders
eventually do right?
They applied Scriptural counsel
and made peace.
For example, the divine counsel at James 3:17
reminds all of us
to be “peaceable [and] reasonable.”
The Watchtower  once suggested
how this could be applied to elders.
I quote: “Peacemakers
modestly express their thoughts
“and then respectfully listen
to those of others.
“Instead of insisting on his own way,
“a peacemaker will prayerfully consider
his brother’s viewpoint.
“If no Bible principle is violated,
“there is usually room
for varied points of view.
“Experienced overseers
know that preserving the peace
is more important
than getting one’s own way.”
What a beautiful thought!
So, what’s our first lesson?
If we as elders apply Scriptural counsel
in our dealings with one another,
we’ll never allow a difference of opinion
to become a cause for animosity.
Romans 12:10 outlines a second lesson.
Please open your Bible with me there.
Under inspiration, at Romans 12:10,
Paul wrote this:
“In brotherly love
“have tender affection for one another.
In showing honor to one another,
take the lead.”
Brothers (elders), now,
before life gets even more difficult,
this is what we need to do.
We need to strengthen
love and affection for one another.
We can do that by continuing to speak well
of our fellow elders
in public and in private,
by resisting the urge to talk negatively
to other elders
about any disagreements that arise,
and by regularly reflecting
on our brothers’ good qualities
and on our past service together.
In the video, weren’t we happy
to see how Tim and Carl
imitated Paul and Barnabas
and eventually reaped peace?
Though not easy,
they applied Scriptural counsel
and resolved their problem.
That warm smile on Carl’s face
when he showed up at Tim’s home,
the dessert (perhaps Tim’s favorite pie),
the heart-to-heart talk,
and their lasting friendship, even in prison,
showed that they maintained
their love and affection for each other.
Dear brothers, elders, may we do likewise.
Let’s settle disagreements
quickly and peacefully.
When we do so, we’ll reap not only peace,
but we’ll prove to be examples to the flock,
just like Paul and Barnabas.
Brother Stephen Lett,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now consider the final talk
of this symposium,
“How They Sowed and Reaped Peace
—Modern-Day Examples.”